What were the joys and frustrations, primary joys and frustrations of that task?
I pretty much left the study abroad run by their own director.
Now remember also I had the counseling center.
Now that was frustrating because the guy who'd been brought here from the University of Oregon as director, when he was brought here, that reported to Ed Cooper as being
It was separated down and come underneath.
And he didn't like the fact that as director, he was reporting to a director.
And he's one of these guys that always, I don't know how many times I've said Malthus and Harrington talk about his hidden agendas, whatever they were.
I mean, he was constantly frustrated.
And I was constantly dealing, I probably spent as much or more time dealing with the counseling center and his personal views on where he fit it in as anything.
I think a joint part of that job was doing the new faculty orientation.
I thought that was long overdue for the university.
We've always had orientation for students, but new faculty were just thrown out there to do whatever.
I had one faculty member who had been here and went to Southern Illinois and came back.
You may know Jim Crock in education.
He said, Ron, I learned more in that week about A&M.
than learning the seven years of whatever it was that I was here before.
I'm not claiming we did that good of a job, but we tried to do it.
The frustrating part, other than dealing with the academic counseling part,
was at the end of the semester, we sent out our drop letters.
And what you, as you want to go to the phone calls from parents, and occasionally from other people, mostly from parents or from students, you mean that my son or daughter cannot come back.
Why?
And I would go through this, and more often than not, the parent would not know
how poorly their child had done at any time, because they had not been taught.
And then we have a constant stream of people coming.
Ed Guthrie took care of part of it, and I took care of part of it, and explained.
And much like the ground, it blew to a block of .4 is pretty bad.
But she did come back and she was a smart girl.
But I think the most frustrating part, other than acting as a counselor, was dealing with the end of the semester
Did you often find that parents were uninformed about their child's grades
Well, there were male grades, but I'm not sure if they understood them.
The students say, yes, I made a deal in that course because Professor Smith was so bad and did not treat me right.
But I think some would generally be surprised how poorly their child had done.
And to understand the context of which, well, if you're down this many grade points, then the chances of you ever graduating are pretty slim.
And how did you all advise the students then?
Who did the advising?
I did some of it, but I hadn't got them so sure that I had four advisors.
Many who were part-time, they were graduate students in the EDC and our EdSite, mostly EdSite.
A few were full-time, part-times who were not pursuing any graduate program.
Now also in there, we did the pre-law advising, the pre-med advising, and almost all of that type of stuff.
Some of the pre-med, as long as
What was that guy named Gravitt?
Howard Gravitt.
As long as he was around, he would do all of that in a second.
But after that, we did some of it.
We did some of pre-everything.
Usually, personally, when I talk to a student, my first question was, how do you study?
And who do you study?
And how much time do you devote to this?
And how do you pursue it?
And this would be the same thing I was talking to in my own class when I was talking to them.
And I almost invariably knew this, but I knew that most were not for vulnerability.
Most were for time management, time organization.
And I said, now you have a, tell me your schedule.
I have MWF 8th and MWF 11th, so I said, what do you do between 9 and 11?
Well, I go to the MS and get a cup of coffee.
I said, you ever think about sitting down on the bench out there and reading 10 pages of history and doing five math problems or whatever?
Oh, oh, oh, we study between classes.
I said, it won't hurt.
I said, have you ever thought about studying material but worse talking about it in class?
Oh, we do that?
I said, when did you look at your notes the first time, the night before the exam?
So you ever thought about looking at the day you take them and working on them?
Stuff that you've all said a thousand times.
But mostly it came, well, I don't have time.
I said, okay, you describe your day to me and you tell me what you do.
And then as it went on, I said, look, we had this time here.
Oh, oh, oh.
It just, but in part to answer your question, this is the way I handle it.
This way I'm trying to have the people who work for me have it, and that you approach and understand the point that these people are generally capable, and the thing you need to do is find some way to motivate them.
Did you all encounter many students that in hindsight perhaps shouldn't have been admitted
There were probably some.
But most of the students had the capabilities.
They had the capabilities, but they were not used.
What was the typical student load in that era?
You're talking about 15 hours, 15 to 19, depending on what you're making.
15 would be minimal.
This 12-hour stuff has come along, and that's part of the government's fault.
Because if you take 12 hours, then you're eligible for a NEO.
I don't know what these things are.
if at that time, what were the off-campus
or the extracurricular problems that these students, were they drinking much?
Were there drugs in that era?
You're talking about the 60s, where it was a great deal of drugs.
I didn't know about that.
What about the late 70s and early 80s?
If it was, I did not see it in my students.
I'm sure it was there.
There were occasional times when I would see a student who was perhaps having it.
One thing I learned very quickly, if I found a student that I felt was really going to the deep end, I would at that moment call counseling and take them over or get them over.
pretty quickly.
For a while we had two counseling centers, which I thought was a mistake.
Wade Birch is headed, I guess they're surviving the one now.
There's academic counseling that I had, and student counseling was the one over in the Y.
Do you remember any truly tragic situations you encountered?
I was thinking, I had this one young man in the reserve unit, his roommate called me and said he had just taken off going down Weldon Road.
So I got in the car and found him and brought him back to the office, which was in Naval, only this
Brother Roddick, he'd had three or four years active duty, come back in and he was in the reserve unit.
And his bottom line was he was lonely.
And I thought that was strange.
I've never understood myself how you can be lonely.
I mean, I just never had experienced that.
And it turned out his only real...
whether the class was in the reserve unit.
So we sort of built on that as his base for belonging to something.
This doesn't deal with a student, but you remember a department head named Bill Smith in psychology
And I may have related you to this before.
I know he committed suicide.
About two days before that, we were in his office listening.
And we were talking about a variety of things.
And he said, darling, you know, I've got a little problem.
I said, what is it?
And he said, the effect of cheating on main contacts.
That's not the word he used.
Let's remove that word cheating.
He said,
Somebody's in contact.
I said, I don't think about it.
It's always been my understanding that if you made a mistake or whatever, if you contact the IRS and it sets us up, take your fines, take your penalties, or whatever.
And we went on.
And then two days later, I'm shutting this up.
And I wondered for years after that if I missed something in my conversation with you.
Because two days isn't very long.
And he bought that pistol that day, and we talked the day after, within a relatively short period.
And you drove out where it was, the highway, and you killed him.
Of course, he didn't live too far from you, however long you did.
Just across the street.
Across the street.
A descendant of the family of Joseph Smith.
But a Mormon convert, his wife, and he also had a drinking problem, which ate on him, apparently, because that was certainly inconsistent with the Mormon church.
So he had a whole bunch of things nagging at him.
Well, I mean, she was the director of the Senate.
I believe she was a .
Yeah, that's right.
That's right.
And he was talking about how badly the Swedes who came out there as railroad workers were treated in Utah.
And then he changed it and made it somewhere to Smith, I think, to get away from the Swedish background.
With the students, I can't recall any
And this one girl, I wouldn't call her, it was close to tragic for her.
In Harrington, we had these partial walls which had the spines, because you could hear everything going around.
This one girl was in, we were talking about her academic problems, so what it really got, she had an abortion that summer, and it was really, really preying on her mind.
And I didn't feel I was confident to deal with that, and I think I'm going to turn it over to student council.
But I don't, you know.
You know, our current, our immediate past dean of science here named Ewing,
You were here when his brother Floyd died in the arms.
But that's not directly, it was a tragedy for the Ewing family.
Yeah.
Let's see.
In that student service area, do you remember having any difference in the problems and the realities that you all dealt with
among the corps members compared to the civilian students, compared to the women, compared to the blacks or the Hispanics?
I guess not.
You mean did we see more of either of these?
And did any outsider attempt inappropriately to affect the way you all went around your business?
All right, in terms of the
you began that service when Jarvis Miller was president and Mac Prescott was vice, I think we then still call it vice president, and you reported to Prescott.
Did they give you?
I reported through Chuck.
Through Chuck McCandless.
Were you given any guidelines when you started?
We just sat down and talked about what we were going to do and what's going to be in it.
Now, as that, I sat on the AOC, but I also went to APC, though APC was composed of provosts and the deans.
I sat in there.
I was not a voting member.
All right, the AOC, Academic Operations Committee.
That was all the associate and assistant deans for student affairs in the various colleges.
Describe the real function of those people.
Of that group?
Yeah.
And of those individuals, what they did in their colleges.
Well, each college had either an assistant or associate dean, one or two.
I'm not talking about the ones for research.
This is one for student affairs.
the life or death or the stay or don't stay of the students, which is we did in academic services for our general studies.
They were the John Beckhams and the...
Describe some of those people that you remember, like John Beckham, certainly.
with John Beckham for I don't know how many years with the Association of Science, dealing with students.
John had a very deep, resonant voice and he scared the kids to death.
And I don't think he was, he was just talking normal.
John ran a, in the College of Science ran a pretty tight ship.
And he had a guy who was his assistant who is still around us on the boat,
to read Reno the night, but I can't remember his name.
But John, you always knew where he stood.
He was, I would say, generally working in the interest of the student, but don't mess with me.
And if he kicked one out, it was usually a pretty good reason.
Sam Gillespie was always way out there somewhere.
In business.
I know Sam must have gotten tired because he's usually voted down nine to one of whatever he brought up.
I say nine.
However many was there, Sam always thought, I've told you this, I always want to be too hard on the students.
Mm-hmm.
And, of course, business got a pretty bad reputation here on that.
And if someone would bring up something, invariably he'd be voted down because whatever he wanted to do was what most people thought was not what they should have been doing.
In education?
For a long time it was Brian Cole, and Brian's a good guy.
I understand now he's back as department head.
You know, the reason he gave up being associate dean, he couldn't get promoted.
He was associate professor in this university.
We're not promoting an administrator.
All right, let's see.
He spent an awful lot of time outside of that job publishing.
Agriculture.
Ag was usually...
He just lives up here on Camelot.
Dwayne Suter was there.
Or Dean Potts.
Potts was pretty much gone when I got involved in it.
Usually it was Dwayne.
Dwayne of Education, Sam Glessie for business, John Beckham for science.
Liberal arts.
Diane Stromer and later Candy.
Did Architecture have one?
She was married and realized she was a lesbian and left and divorced her husband.
Architecture sometime was John O'Neill Greer.
McGillivray for a long time was in that.
She was composed of Ed Cooper.
who was chair as Dean of Admissions and myself as director and then the assistant and our associate dean for Aberdeen College.
Now usually it was the same guy but sometime it may be some other.
In general this, the charge of this was, generally said academic policy.
as far as student affairs, how to deal with them, how to decide who to kick out, not specifics.
Did that group of people care about students?
Generally very much so.
I always thought that Sam, I've told him this, that Sam, he really don't like, I can put it in that kind of words, but most did or they would not have been there.
And some of the same ones assert on the,
What was the name of that?
We're the committee that heard appeals from being kicked out.
Then for a while, I was chair of the University Academic Appeals Committee for faculty, and I didn't like that job.
Fortunately, the three years I was on it, we didn't have a single faculty member separated that we had to deal with.
And I'm glad I've not had to deal this last two years with, what's his name, problem or problem, whatever that is.
All right.
Back on the campus, Dr. Miller was president.
And were you by chance, you were not at commencement, his last commencement, where he didn't shake hands with a student.
Okay.
How did you hear that he had been terminated as president?
Do you know?
I was MSC when he was appointed and all of us were aghast.
Oh, okay.
Why?
You were aghast, why?
I had known Jarvis so short and I just couldn't imagine him.
See, we were at Abraham Methodist Church together.
We had kids the same age.
Not that we saw him that much socially, but we would see him occasionally.
I always thought he was a like.
Don't put that down.
Well, is there anybody that you and other faculty members thought was the likely president at that time?
Did you all have an opinion about Calhoun?
I assumed it would be John.
So did I. I was just shocked.
So did I.
And I can't remember who came in and told us that.
Someone who worked in the MSC had just heard it.
And my guess is 2, 3, 2.33 in the afternoon or whatever.
Somewhere about in there.
All right.
Do you remember anything that changed under his administration, generally?
Better or worse?
Not for me personally, except...
I got this job.
See, we were in California.
When did you appoint Mack as provost?
Almost the first week.
Why were we?
Because we were in California and called back home.
See, Mary was working for Mack, and I guess that's when we learned he was provost.
Because Jarvis called me in the first day and said he was considering Maxwell, Prescott, and me.
I think I agree with you.
I don't know.
When you heard that Dr. Miller had been terminated?
I just remember hearing that Roy said we were going to fire his ass, but I don't know where it was.
Because that happened, the decision was made late on a Wednesday 20 years ago this summer.
Let's see, did I just ask you were not present at the commencement when he didn't shake hands?
Okay.
I don't know where I was.
Do you remember what the general reaction was of faculty and staff?
Generally, they were not sorry to see him go.
Jarvis, he couldn't cut it.
He just wasn't.
And then Samson came back, and I don't think Ruth has ever gotten over him not getting that job.
She liked being the acting president.
What's different acting in the interim?
I don't know.
Because I read on Mrs. Dickey, she was acting and she was made interim.
Yes.
And I do not know, and I don't know a linguistic distinction.
I don't either.
Then Vandenberg became president.
Did that have any effect on your task at all?
No.
Well, yes, because every time I had him lined up to speak, he didn't show up.
Here.
No, honestly.
New faculty orientation.
First we had the provost and .
And every time, after the first time, we needed .
because here we have 200 new faculty and you're gonna get to meet your president now.
And did you retire, who was president when you retired?
It was in 86.
Was Vandiver still president, I guess, okay.
All right, compare the students in your last years and in your first years.
You know, I've often thought about that, and people talk about all these monumental changes, and they're better or worse things, whatever.
And I'd be terribly reluctant to say that between the late 50s and the mid-80s that there was a marked difference.
I know I've read where they're supposed to have been.
but maybe the way I've felt about students or dealt with students.
I know those who sit up and get on a soapbox and say they're 200 times better and better prepared today than they've ever been.
I often think preparation is only preparation, but attitude, how you approach it, how you work it, something like that.
I'm curious when we get through,
I don't know.
I feel that they're a little better prepared now that their math and their science, that they've read a little more, they've traveled a little more.
On the other hand, I would still take, I'd like to know where that person is today, but it's probably the CEO of something.
In terms of your courses that you taught, did you grade any differently?
Was an A?
It's always an A's and A's and A's.
OK. And the B's and B's and the D's.
You have to shift.
You know, we'd go from 60s passing to 70s passing or whatever, or 90 or 94.
But I never consciously felt that I was really any different.
Now, Fred claimed that when I had him in the Constitution, I graded him harder than anybody else.
He may have been correct.
Did you have a similar percentage of F students under the higher admission requirements in the 80s, a smaller number?
What about their general attitude, liberal, conservative, sophistication, et cetera?
Any difference there?
Well, I certainly think they may be somewhat more sophisticated.
Obviously, I think the whole world, at least our society, is somewhat more.
If by that you mean you mentioned more widely traveled, better read, I guess what I was thinking about public government
I think there's a difference between being prepared and being intellectually able.
I hear people making, geez, well, I came from a small high school.
Well, I don't care how small a high school you came from.
If you decide that you want to go there.
I'm reminded of this graduate student that Prescott had one time when we were in the lab.
He didn't see his first school in Mexico until he was 12.
He didn't learn to read until he was that.
And when he was here as a graduate student,
He was a crackerjack, because he had the innate ability to do it, and he was given the opportunity.
I guess I've always been a little bit hesitant to compare the 80s to the 50s or 60s as far as intellectual ability.
Preparation maybe, greater exposure, certainly.
Compare the history department when you retired to when you arrived.
When I arrived, probably the next 20 or 25 years after that, I thought it was, I hate to use the word integrated whole, but certainly people who cared about each other, respected each other, and were not trying to cut each other's throat.
Before I retired, it was in groups and cliques and
I just, I didn't, and I think it's even much worse now from what I hear.
What about their attitude about students and teaching?
Research is first, and students are somewhere down there.
I'm not sure how far down, but it's down there somewhere.
See, for many, many years, not just because I was an undergraduate advisor, but after that, I know Chuck used to say that he could not remember when a history major was not ready to graduate when he said he was ready to graduate.
Because he made sure that they had done everything they were supposed to do.
Just like when I did academic service, I said, I don't want any bunnies.
I don't like surprises.
I don't know what's going on.
And I think now they have some of the secondaries doing the advising, and I don't think they're confident to do it.
And I know this sounds like a terrible, but by the time I retired, a lot of the new people I did not know well, nor did I care, nor did I want to know them well.
They were from somewhere, I don't know where they were from.
During all your years in the history department, as you look back now, what were the most popular courses with the students and why?
Or maybe if it wasn't a course, it was an individual.
Well, I've already mentioned Raffa.
He was only two years in his Texas history.